VN-Okta 381082 session management (#2096)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/concepts/session/index.md

---
title: Session management
meta:
  - name: description

>     content: An overview of session management in Okta. Learn about sessions in Okta and what kind of session logout to implement.

Reviewer: replace logout with "sign-in"

Reviewer 2: This wouldn't be hyphenated. Sign in is only hyphenated when it's an adjective - when it's describing a noun...like Sign-In Page or sign-in process. This would just be: ....what kind of session sign in to implement.

Author: thanks, i'll replace logout here with "sign out"

---

## Session management with Okta

> An Identity Provider (IdP) is a service that stores and manages digital identities. Okta is an IdP service that stores and verifies user identities, and is able to provide a user with a single set of sign-in credentials, allowing the user to access multiple applications. A session is a group of user interactions with a resource, such as a IdP service or an application (app), for a given amount of time. Using Okta as your IdP, there are two types of sessions that you need to consider for managing the user experience&mdash;the IdP session and the application session.

Reviewer: credentials, allowing the user > credentials that allow the user

add space between the emdash

Author: thanks, added all your suggestions, except the em-dash one (global style guide didn't have spaces)

### IdP session

> The IdP session is created by Okta after the user is authenticated using their credentials and various MFA options. Once authenticated, the user is able to access apps within the managed identity organization (org) using SSO, all within the scope of the IdP session. The session uses cookies to store user information to track and facilitate interactions between the user and the org. The IdP session is active until the user signs out of the org or when the session expires, based on the policies defined in the org.

Reviewer: using SSO > by using SSO

### Application session

The application session (also known as a local session) is created by the app after the user is authenticated. This session uses cookies to store user app-specific information to track and facilitate interactions between the user and the app. The application session time frame depends on the nature of the app:

> * for privileged access apps, such as an e-commerce site where users make payments, a shorter and restrictive session is required

Reviewer: for > For
add period at the end of the sentence

> * for non-privileged access apps, such as a catalog site where users browse listed items, the session can live longer and remain active even when the user navigates away, closes the browser tab or website, or closes the mobile app

Reviewer: for both bullet items: 
1. for > For
2. Add a period at the end of the sentence.

Reviewer: Susan's rewrite is better.

> * for non-privileged access apps, such as a catalog site where users browse listed items, the session can live longer and remain active even when the user navigates away, closes the browser tab or website, or closes the mobile app

Reviewer: the session can live longer > the session can be live longer OR the session can be active longer

> Identity management admins and app developers need to collaborate on how to manage the IdP session with the application sessions to produce an optimal user experience with security, device, and app privileged access in mind. This implies balancing terminating sessions and redirecting the user to re-authenticate for security purposes, in concert with extending the session or silently re-authenticating with a new session for a frictionless user experience.

Reviewer: in concert with > combined with

> ### Examples of logout experiences

Reviewer: logout > sign-out

#### Privileged access use case

> For privileged access apps, such as an e-commerce payment app, securing sensitive user information is paramount and application sessions need to be tightly restricted. Application sessions are usually short lived and inactivity timeouts are in the minutes for these types of apps. Developers need to employ best practices and end sessions when they are no longer required. If the application session is terminated, the user must be redirected to the IdP to re-authenticate back into the app for a new session. If there is no active IdP session during the redirect, the user is prompted to sign in to the IdP and then using SSO to sign in to the app for a new session.

Reviewer: and then using SSO > and then use SSO

#### Non-privileged access use case

For non-privileged access apps, such as a loyalty program catalog, sessions can be active for a long period of time (even days) and app developers don't need to implement session timeouts to restrict access. This is especially true for mobile apps where you want your users to have a seamless and frictionless user experience. In this scenario, the application session can outlive the IdP session. Application sessions can still track user interactions without the IdP session. However, when the user signs out and ends the application session, without the IdP session, the user is redirected to the IdP sign-in page and must authenticate with the IdP to gain access to the app, as before.

> ### Terminating sessions

Reviewer: Terminating > Terminate

> #### Local logout

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Local sign out
```

> #### Local logout

Author: I'm leaving the "Local logout" title

> Local logout is the act of signing the user out of the app and terminating the application session. The user IdP session is still active and other application sessions are not affected by terminating a specific local application session. This type of logout is managed by the app. If the user wants to access the app again, they are automatically authenticated through the active IdP session into the app and the app creates a new session for the user.

Reviewer: logout > sign-out

See [Sign users out of your app](/docs/guides/sign-users-out/-/sign-out-of-your-app/) for an example of a local logout implementation with Okta.

> #### Single logout

Reviewer 2: is this an Okta official term? If not - let's change it to Single sign out

Reviewer 2: and then throughout this section....

Author: I'm using "Single logout" and "Local logout" when referring to the official term.

> Single logout is the act of signing the user out of the Okta IdP and ending the IdP session. Typically, the user is redirected to re-authenticate into Okta to start a new IdP session. Active application sessions for the user can still persist depending on the restrictive nature of the app. For non-privileged access apps, the user can still access the app within the scope of the application session. For example, a user can still browse through a catalog of vacation experiences and add to their cart. When this user is ready to checkout and make a payment, the app can enforce a privileged access workflow and redirect the user to re-authenticate with the IdP to secure an IdP session as well as an application session.

Reviewer: checkout > check out

> Apps within the Okta org can trigger a Single logout. See [Single Logout in applications](https://help.okta.com/en/prod/Content/Topics/Apps/Apps_Single_Logout.htm) for instructions on how to setup Single logout in Okta.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apps within the Okta org can trigger a Single logout. See [Single Logout in applications](https://help.okta.com/en/prod/Content/Topics/Apps/Apps_Single_Logout.htm) for instructions on how to set up Single logout in Okta.
```

> Apps within the Okta org can trigger a Single logout. See [Single Logout in applications](https://help.okta.com/en/prod/Content/Topics/Apps/Apps_Single_Logout.htm) for instructions on how to setup Single logout in Okta.

Reviewer: Single > single

<!--Refer to [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BzWqBlR5s-n9Y5ieoBzuOBybqI7fecnxkXxO_Qp5k-c/edit#heading=h.9uxt38ijqwh] for logout implementations with the Okta Identity Engine.-->

> Explore [Okta sample apps](/docs/guides/quickstart/cli/register-app/#start-from-a-sample-app) for non-privileged access implementations of logout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Explore [Okta sample apps](/docs/guides/quickstart/cli/register-app/#start-from-a-sample-app) for non-privileged access implementations of sign out.
```

For non-privileged access apps, such as a loyalty program catalog, sessions can be active for a long period of time (even days) and app developers don't need to implement session timeouts to restrict access. This is especially true for mobile apps where you want your users to have a seamless and frictionless user experience. In this scenario, the application session can outlive the IdP session. Application sessions can still track user interactions without the IdP session. However, when the user signs out and ends the application session, without the IdP session, the user is redirected to the IdP sign-in page and must authenticate with the IdP to gain access to the app, as before.

### Terminate sessions

#### Local logout

Local logout is the act of signing the user out of the app and terminating the application session. The user IdP session is still active and other application sessions aren't affected by terminating a specific local application session. Local logout is managed by the app. If the user wants to access the app again, they are automatically authenticated through the active IdP session into the app and the app creates a new session for the user.

> See [Sign users out of your app](/docs/guides/sign-users-out/-/sign-out-of-your-app/) for an example of a Local logout implementation with Okta.

Reviewer 2: would it be Local logout, Local Logout, or local logout here?

Author: Thanks, I'll update to "local logout".

#### Single logout

Single logout is the act of signing the user out of the Okta IdP and ending the IdP session. Typically, the user is redirected to re-authenticate into Okta to start a new IdP session. Active application sessions for the user can still persist depending on the restrictive nature of the app. For non-privileged access apps, the user can still access the app within the scope of the application session. For example, a user can still browse through a catalog of vacation experiences and add to their cart. When this user is ready to check out and make a payment, the app can enforce a privileged access workflow and redirect the user to re-authenticate with the IdP to secure an IdP session as well as an application session.

> Apps within the Okta org can trigger a Single logout. See [Single Logout in applications](https://help.okta.com/en/prod/Content/Topics/Apps/Apps_Single_Logout.htm).

Reviewer 2: is it Single logout, Single Logout, or single logout?

Author: Thanks - updating to "single logout"

---
title: Session management
meta:
  - name: description
    content: An overview of session management in Okta. Learn about sessions in Okta and what kind of session sign out to implement.
---

# Session management with Okta

> An Identity Provider (IdP) is a service that stores and manages digital identities. Okta is an IdP service that stores and verifies user identities. Okta provides a federated sign-in service so that a user can access multiple applications with a single set of sign-in credentials. A session is a group of user interactions with a resource, such as an IdP service or an application (app), for a given amount of time. When you use Okta as your IdP, there are two types of sessions that you need to consider for managing the user experience&mdash;the IdP session and the application session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Identity Provider (IdP) is a service that stores and manages digital identities. Okta is an IdP service that stores and verifies user identities. Okta provides a federated sign-in service so that a user can access multiple applications with a single set of sign-in credentials. A session is a group of user interactions with a resource, such as an IdP service or an application (app) for a given amount of time. When you use Okta as your IdP, there are two types of sessions that you need to consider for managing the user experience&mdash;the IdP session and the application session.
```

Author: I added the comma to close the parentheses phrase. I guess I can just use parentheses here to make the additional info less formal... but I was avoiding the double parentheses since I have "(app)" already.

## IdP session

> The IdP session is created by Okta after the user is authenticated using their credentials and various MFA options. After authentication, the user is able to access apps within the managed identity organization (org) by using Single Sign-On (SSO), all within the scope of the IdP session. The session uses cookies to store user information to track and facilitate interactions between the user and the org. The IdP session is active until the user signs out of the org or when the session expires, based on the policies defined in the org.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IdP session is created by Okta after the user is authenticated by using credentials and various MFA options. After authentication, the user is able to access apps within the managed identity organization (org) by using Single Sign-On (SSO), all within the scope of the IdP session. The session uses cookies to store user information to track and facilitate interactions between the user and the org. The IdP session is active until the user signs out of the org or when the session expires, based on the policies defined in the org.
```

Author: Keeping the original sentence. "by entering user" is confusing to know who's credentials the user is entering.

## Application session

The application session (also known as a local session) is created by the app after the user is authenticated. This session uses cookies to store user app-specific information to track and facilitate interactions between the user and the app. The application session time frame depends on the nature of the app:

* A shorter and restrictive session is required for privileged access apps, such as an e-commerce site where users make payments.
* A longer and less restrictive session is typical for non-privileged access apps, such as a catalog site where users browse listed items. The session for these apps can remain active even when the user navigates away, closes the browser tab or website, or closes the mobile app.

> Identity management admins and app developers need to collaborate on how to manage the IdP session with the application sessions to produce an optimal user experience with security, device, and app privileged access in mind. This implies balancing terminating sessions and redirecting the user to re-authenticate for security purposes, combined with extending the session or silently re-authenticating with a new session for a frictionless user experience.

Reviewer: 2nd sentence: What is "This" in "This implies..."?
How about: "This collaboration implies balancing..."

Author: I will add this suggestion in a local commit. Thanks

> Identity management admins and app developers need to collaborate on how to manage the IdP session with the application sessions to produce an optimal user experience with security, device, and app privileged access in mind. This implies balancing terminating sessions and redirecting the user to re-authenticate for security purposes, combined with extending the session or silently re-authenticating with a new session for a frictionless user experience.

Reviewer: 2nd sentence: May be a bit tricky, but can this be a bullet list?

> ## Examples of sign out experiences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Examples of sign-out experiences
```

### Privileged access use case

> For privileged access apps, such as an e-commerce payment app, securing sensitive user information is paramount and application sessions need to be tightly restricted. Application sessions are usually short lived and inactivity timeouts are in the minutes for these types of apps. Developers need to employ best practices and end sessions when they are no longer required. If the application session is terminated, the user must be redirected to the IdP to re-authenticate back into the app for a new session. If there is no active IdP session during the redirect, the user is prompted to sign in to the IdP and then use SSO to sign in to the app for a new session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For privileged access apps, such as an e-commerce payment app, securing sensitive user information is paramount and application sessions need to be tightly restricted. Application sessions are usually short lived and inactivity timeouts are in the minutes for these types of apps. Developers need to employ best practices and end application sessions when they are no longer required. If the application session is terminated, the user must be redirected to the IdP to re-authenticate back into the app for a new session. If there is no active IdP session during the redirect, the user is prompted to sign in to the IdP and then use SSO to sign in to the app for a new IdP session.
```

Author: I will update this suggestion on a local commit. Thanks!

### Non-privileged access use case

> For non-privileged access apps, such as a loyalty program catalog, sessions can be active for a long period of time (even days) and app developers don't need to implement session timeouts to restrict access. This is especially true for mobile apps where you want your users to have a seamless and frictionless user experience. In this scenario, the application session can outlive the IdP session. Application sessions can still track user interactions without the IdP session. However, when the user signs out and ends the application session, without the IdP session, the user is redirected to the IdP sign-in page and must authenticate with the IdP to gain access to the app, as before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For non-privileged access apps, such as a loyalty program catalog, sessions can be active for a long period of time (even days) and app developers don't need to implement session timeouts to restrict access. This is especially true for mobile apps where you want your users to have a seamless and frictionless user experience. In this scenario, the application session can outlive the IdP session. Application sessions can still track user interactions without the IdP session. However, when the user signs out and ends the application session without the IdP session, the user is redirected to the IdP sign-in page and must authenticate with the IdP to gain access to the app, as before.
```

## Terminate sessions

> ### Local logout

Reviewer: Guess we can't use **Local sign-out**?

Author: Jeff says we should use the industry term.

> Local logout is the act of signing the user out of the app and terminating the application session. The user IdP session is still active and other application sessions aren't affected by terminating a specific local application session. Local logout is managed by the app. If the user wants to access the app again, they are automatically authenticated through the active IdP session into the app and the app creates a new session for the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Local logout is the act of signing the user out of the app and terminating the application session. The user IdP session is still active, and other application sessions aren't affected by terminating a specific local application session. Local logout is managed by the app. If the user wants to access the app again, the user is automatically authenticated through the active IdP session into the app, and the app creates a new session for the user.
```

> See [Sign users out of your app](/docs/guides/sign-users-out/-/sign-out-of-your-app/) for a guide to implement local logout with Okta.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Sign users out of your app](/docs/guides/sign-users-out/-/sign-out-of-your-app/) for more information on how to implement local logout with Okta.
```

Author: Going to stick with "guide" since we didn't tell users how to implement the task yet to say "for more information..
."

### Single logout

> Single logout is the act of signing the user out of the IdP and all of the apps signed in with the same IdP credentials. This results in ending the IdP session and all the associated application sessions for the user.

Reviewer: Do you mean this:
"Single logout is the act of signing the user out of the IdP and signing out of all the apps with the same IdP credentials."
OR this:
"Single logout is the act of signing the user out of the IdP, which also signs the user out of all the apps with the same IdP credentials."

Author: I used the first suggestion in a local commit. Thanks!

Currently, Okta supports single logout initiated by an app, where the user signs out of an app and the Okta IdP, ending both the app and IdP sessions. However, other active application sessions for the user can still persist without the IdP session, depending on the restrictive nature of the apps. For non-privileged access apps, the user can still access the app within the scope of the application session. For example, a user can still browse through a catalog of vacation experiences and add to their cart. When this user is ready to check out and make a payment, the app can enforce a privileged access workflow and redirect the user to re-authenticate with Okta to secure an IdP session. For privileged access apps with short-lived sessions, the user is typically redirected to re-authenticate with Okta to start a new IdP session and an application session.

> See [Sign users out of Okta](/docs/guides/sign-users-out/-/sign-out-of-okta/) for a guide to implement Okta sign out. For Okta Admin Console app-initiated single logout configuration, see [Single Logout in applications](https://help.okta.com/en/prod/Content/Topics/Apps/Apps_Single_Logout.htm).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Sign users out of Okta](/docs/guides/sign-users-out/-/sign-out-of-okta/) for more information on how to implement Okta sign-out. For Okta Admin Console app-initiated single logout configuration, see [Single Logout in applications](https://help.okta.com/en/prod/Content/Topics/Apps/Apps_Single_Logout.htm).
```

Author: Going to leave this paragraph as-is: "sign out" used here is not an adjective, and we didn't tell them how to implement sign out yet, so we are not providing "more information".

> **Note:** In the SAML world, app-initiated single logout is also known as Service Provider-initiated (SP-initiated) single logout (SLO).

> Explore [Okta sample apps](/docs/guides/quickstart/cli/register-app/#start-from-a-sample-app) for sample code with non-privileged access implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Okta sample apps](/docs/guides/quickstart/cli/register-app/#start-from-a-sample-app) for sample code with non-privileged access implementations.
```

Author: Going to leave "Explore", since we want the user to explore (download, build and run) the various sample apps. "See" makes it sound like this is just a document to view.
